**Original Post:**,https://rpdfl.com/12-tips-before-building-pool/.     Building a swimming pool is one of the most exciting home improvement projects
you'll ever undertake, but it's also one of the most complex. At **RPD Custom
Pools** , we've guided hundreds of homeowners through this journey, and we've
learned that informed clients make better decisions and enjoy better outcomes.

Whether you're in[ South
Florida](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Florida), the Palm Beaches, or
anywhere in between, these twelve essential insights will help you navigate
the pool construction process with confidence.

## **1\. Your Soil Conditions Dramatically Impact Construction**

Here's something most homeowners never consider until it becomes a costly
surprise: what's beneath your lawn matters enormously. South Florida features
highly variable soil conditions—sandy soils, rocky limestone, high water
tables, clay pockets, and everything in between.

Sandy soils require extensive base preparation to prevent settling. Rocky
conditions demand specialized excavation equipment and techniques. High water
tables necessitate dewatering systems during construction and may require
hydrostatic relief valves in the pool floor. Each condition affects both
construction methods and costs.

At[ RPD Custom Pools](https://share.google/e6qggixHquf3pDCLT), we conduct
thorough site evaluations before providing estimates. We've encountered every
soil condition imaginable throughout our years of experience, and we know how
to build pools that remain structurally sound for decades regardless of what's
underground.

### **Why This Matters to You**

Companies that don't properly assess site conditions often provide
artificially low estimates, then hit you with "unexpected" charges once
excavation reveals challenges. Reputable builders evaluate your property
thoroughly and provide accurate estimates that account for likely conditions.
While this might mean slightly higher initial quotes, it prevents devastating
surprises during construction.

## **2\. Permit Timelines Vary Wildly by Municipality**

One of the most common sources of frustration in pool construction? Permitting
delays that push back your entire schedule. Different municipalities process
permits at vastly different speeds—some approve within two weeks, others take
two months or longer.

Additionally, permit requirements vary by location. Setback distances from
property lines, required safety features, electrical codes, and environmental
considerations all differ based on where you live. What's acceptable in one
town might be prohibited in the next.

We handle all permitting as part of our service, leveraging our established
relationships with building departments throughout the region. Our experience
means we know exactly what each municipality requires, how to prepare
applications that sail through review, and realistic timelines for approval.
This eliminates a major headache from your plate.

### **The Hidden Timeline Impact**

When planning your pool project, the actual construction time is only part of
the equation. Design finalization (2-3 weeks), permit processing (2-8 weeks),
and scheduling with contractors all affect your overall timeline.
Understanding this prevents disappointment when your pool isn't ready as
quickly as you initially hoped.

## **3\. Pool Maintenance Is Easier Than You Think (With the Right Setup)**

Many homeowners hesitate about pool ownership because they've heard horror
stories about constant maintenance. The truth? Modern pools with proper
equipment require far less attention than pools built even a decade ago.

Automated chemical feeders maintain balanced water with minimal intervention.
Self-cleaning systems reduce manual vacuuming. Variable-speed pumps and
efficient filters minimize maintenance while reducing operating costs. Smart
controllers alert you to any issues before they become problems.

We design pools that are genuinely easy to maintain. During the design process
at[ RPD Custom Pools](https://share.google/e6qggixHquf3pDCLT), we discuss your
comfort level with pool care and recommend equipment that matches your
preferences. If you want absolute minimal maintenance, we can create systems
that require perhaps 15-20 minutes weekly attention. If you enjoy the process
and want more hands-on involvement, we design accordingly.

### **Realistic Maintenance Expectations**

Weekly tasks typically include skimming surface debris (5 minutes), emptying
skimmer and pump baskets (5 minutes), testing and adjusting water chemistry
(10 minutes), and brushing walls if needed (10 minutes). Monthly tasks involve
deeper cleaning and equipment checks. Many homeowners hire professional
services for weekly maintenance, costing $100-200 monthly, freeing them to
simply enjoy their pool.

## **4\. Energy Efficiency Dramatically Affects Operating Costs**

The difference between an efficiently designed pool and an inefficient one can
mean hundreds or even thousands of dollars annually in operating costs. With
electricity rates in Florida, this isn't trivial.

Variable-speed pumps represent the single most impactful efficiency upgrade,
reducing energy consumption by 50-75% compared to traditional single-speed
pumps. They're so effective that Florida building codes now require them for
new construction. LED lighting uses a fraction of the electricity of older
incandescent bulbs. Solar heating harnesses our abundant sunshine,
dramatically reducing or eliminating heating costs. Proper pool covers reduce
heat loss and water evaporation.

We prioritize energy efficiency in every pool design, not because we're trying
to increase project costs, but because it dramatically improves the ownership
experience. Lower monthly operating costs mean more money for family
vacations, entertainment, and simply enjoying life rather than paying utility
bills.

### **Calculating True Ownership Costs**

When budgeting for pool ownership, consider construction costs (one-time),
equipment and materials (ongoing), electricity for pumps, heaters, and lights,
water for refilling due to evaporation, chemicals and cleaning supplies, and
professional maintenance if desired. Efficient designs might cost slightly
more initially but save thousands over the pool's lifetime.

## **5\. Pool Finish Selection Affects More Than Just Appearance**

The interior surface of your pool—the finish—represents one of your most
important design decisions. It affects aesthetics, durability, maintenance
requirements, and cost. The options include traditional plaster, aggregate
finishes (pebble, quartz), tile, and specialized coatings.

Traditional plaster is the most economical option, lasting 7-10 years before
requiring resurfacing. It's smooth and available in various colors but shows
staining more readily and requires more frequent maintenance. Aggregate
finishes incorporate small pebbles or quartz crystals, lasting 15-20+ years.
They're more resistant to staining and chemical damage but cost more
initially. Full tile surfaces offer ultimate durability and stunning
aesthetics but represent the highest investment.

We help clients understand these trade-offs, selecting finishes that align
with their budget, aesthetic preferences, and maintenance comfort level.
There's no universally "best" choice—only the best choice for your specific
situation.

### **Long-Term Considerations**

When evaluating finishes, calculate lifetime costs rather than just initial
expenses. A plaster finish costing $5,000 that needs replacement every 8 years
actually costs more over 20 years than an aggregate finish costing $10,000
that lasts the entire period. We provide these analyses so you understand true
long-term value.

## **6\. Proper Drainage Design Prevents Expensive Problems**

Here's an unglamorous topic that's absolutely critical: drainage. South
Florida receives intense rainfall, and your pool deck and surrounding areas
must handle this water effectively. Poor drainage causes deck deterioration,
soil erosion, foundation problems near your home, and water quality issues in
the pool.

We design comprehensive drainage systems incorporating proper deck sloping
away from structures, drainage channels or systems where needed, consideration
of existing landscape grades, and coordination with your property's overall
water management. This attention to detail prevents problems that would be
expensive to correct after construction.

### **The Water Table Factor**

In many South Florida locations, the water table sits relatively close to the
surface. During heavy rains, hydrostatic pressure can actually push empty
pools upward—a phenomenon called "floating." We account for this during
design, incorporating hydrostatic relief valves if necessary and providing
guidance about water level management during severe weather.

## **7\. Outdoor Living Integration Multiplies Your Pool 's Value**

A pool shouldn't exist in isolation—it should integrate with a comprehensive
outdoor living environment. The most successful projects incorporate covered
patio areas for shade and weather protection, outdoor kitchens ranging from
simple grills to complete cooking centers, fire features like pits or
fireplaces for cooler evenings, comfortable seating and dining areas, and
thoughtful landscaping that creates privacy and beauty.

This holistic approach transforms your backyard into a true extension of your
living space—an outdoor room you'll use constantly rather than just a pool you
swim in occasionally. At RPD Custom Pools, we collaborate with landscape
designers, outdoor kitchen specialists, and other trades to create cohesive
environments that feel intentionally designed rather than assembled piecemeal.

### **Phased Development Strategy**

Budget constraints sometimes prevent implementing everything at once. We can
design a master plan that allows phased development—building the pool first,
adding the outdoor kitchen next year, incorporating the fire feature the
following year. This approach spreads costs while ensuring each phase works
together toward your ultimate vision.

## **8\. Pool Safety Features Are Non-Negotiable**

Florida law requires specific safety features for residential pools, and these
requirements exist for good reason. Drowning remains a leading cause of
accidental death for young children, and proper safety measures dramatically
reduce risks.

Required features typically include barriers (fencing at least 4 feet high
with self-closing, self-latching gates), pool alarms detecting unexpected
water entry, or approved safety covers that support adult weight. We ensure
every pool meets or exceeds these requirements, and we encourage additional
safety measures like multiple layers of protection (combining fencing with
alarms), pool safety covers for when pools aren't in use, and anti-entrapment
drain covers preventing dangerous suction incidents.

### **Beyond Legal Requirements**

We also discuss swimming lessons for children, CPR training for family
members, establishing and enforcing pool rules, and constant supervision when
children are present. Technology helps—alarms provide alerts—but nothing
replaces active adult supervision.

## **9\. Material Lead Times Can Impact Schedules**

The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted something always true but rarely discussed:
material availability affects construction timelines. Specialty tile
selections, custom equipment, and unique features sometimes require weeks or
months to procure.

We manage material ordering and scheduling as part of our project management,
but homeowners should understand that certain choices impact timelines. If you
fall in love with imported tile from Italy, we can absolutely incorporate
it—but it might extend your project by several weeks. Standard materials and
equipment ship quickly; custom or imported items require patience.

### **Planning for Success**

Making design decisions promptly allows us to order materials early,
preventing delays. Indecision about finishes, tile selections, or equipment
choices keeps us from ordering and can push back your entire schedule. We
guide you through decisions systematically, providing deadlines for various
selections so we can maintain momentum.

## **10\. Pool Financing Options Make Dreams Achievable**

Pool construction represents significant investment, but financing options
make projects achievable for families who couldn't pay cash upfront. Options
include home equity loans or lines of credit (often offering tax-deductible
interest), personal loans, contractor financing programs, and refinancing
mortgages to cash out equity.

We work with financing partners who understand pool construction and offer
competitive terms. Many homeowners find that monthly loan payments cost less
than they were spending on vacations and entertainment—essentially, they're
investing in permanent vacation amenities at home.

### **Tax Implications and Home Value**

Consult tax professionals about potential deductions for home equity
financing. Additionally, pools typically increase home values by 5-15% in
South Florida markets where they're expected amenities. While you shouldn't
build a pool solely as financial investment, the value enhancement offsets
some construction costs if you eventually sell.

## **11\. Water Chemistry Isn 't Rocket Science**

Many prospective pool owners worry about water chemistry—balancing pH,
chlorine, alkalinity, and other factors sounds complicated. The reality? Basic
water chemistry requires only simple testing and occasional adjustments.

Modern test kits provide clear results in minutes. Automated chemical feeders
handle much of the work continuously. When adjustments are needed, we're
talking about adding specific amounts of readily available chemicals—it's no
more complex than following a recipe.

We provide comprehensive training on water chemistry basics when we complete
your pool. We explain what to test, how often to test, what the results mean,
and how to make corrections. Within a few weeks, most homeowners feel
completely comfortable managing their pool's chemistry. For those who prefer
not to deal with it at all, professional maintenance services handle
everything.

### **Common Chemistry Myths**

Contrary to popular belief, properly balanced pools don't smell strongly of
chlorine—that smell actually indicates improper chemistry. Saltwater pools
still use chlorine (the salt cell generates it)—they're not "chlorine-free."
Modern sanitization requires far fewer chemicals than pools from decades ago.
The "high-maintenance" reputation pools once had simply doesn't apply to
contemporary systems.

## **12\. The Right Builder Becomes Your Long-Term Partner**

Pool construction doesn't end when we hand you the keys and drive away. The
best builder relationships continue for years—we're available for questions,
service needs, upgrade desires, and simply as a resource who understands your
specific pool.

At[ RPD Custom Pools](https://share.google/e6qggixHquf3pDCLT), we view our
clients as long-term relationships rather than one-time transactions. We check
in after completion to ensure everything is performing perfectly. We're
available by phone or email if questions arise. We provide seasonal
maintenance guidance. When you eventually want to add features or upgrade
equipment, we already understand your system intimately.

This ongoing relationship provides tremendous peace of mind. You're never
alone wondering how to handle an issue or where to find qualified service.
We're your pool experts for life.

### **What This Means Practically**

Choose your builder carefully because you're not just hiring for
construction—you're selecting a partner for years to come. Company stability,
reputation, and commitment to customer service matter as much as construction
quality. We've been serving South Florida for years and plan to continue for
decades more.

## **Your Pool Journey Starts Here**

Building a pool represents one of the most exciting home improvement projects
you'll ever undertake. Armed with these twelve insights, you're prepared to
navigate the process confidently, making informed decisions that result in a
pool you'll love for decades.

At RPD Custom Pools, we're committed to exceeding your expectations at every
stage. From initial design through years of ownership, we're here to ensure
your pool experience is everything you hoped and more.

## **Frequently Asked Questions**

**Q1: What 's the typical lifespan of a swimming pool?**

A properly constructed and maintained pool essentially lasts indefinitely—the
structural shell routinely lasts 50+ years. Individual components have varying
lifespans: pool finishes need resurfacing every 7-20 years depending on
material, equipment like pumps and heaters last 8-15 years, tile and coping
can last the life of the pool with proper care, and deck materials vary from
15-50+ years. Essentially, your pool itself is permanent; certain surfaces and
equipment require periodic replacement.

**Q2: Can I build a pool if I have a small backyard?**

Absolutely! We've designed beautiful pools for compact spaces throughout South
Florida. Options include cocktail pools (typically 10×14 feet or smaller),
plunge pools for cooling off rather than lap swimming, narrow lap pools
maximizing length while minimizing width, and elevated spa-pool combinations
that conserve space. Smart design choices like built-in seating, vertical
water features, and integrated landscaping make small pools feel spacious and
luxurious.

**Q3: How much will my homeowners insurance increase?**

Insurance increases vary by carrier and coverage but typically range from
$200-500 annually. The increase depends on your existing coverage levels,
liability limits, and required safety features. Some carriers offer discounts
if you install fencing beyond minimum requirements or have multiple safety
layers. Contact your insurance agent early in the planning process to
understand costs and requirements specific to your policy.

**Q4: Should I consider a saltwater pool system?**

Saltwater systems generate chlorine from dissolved salt rather than requiring
manually added chlorine. Benefits include softer-feeling water, reduced
chemical handling, and generally steadier chlorine levels. Considerations
include higher initial equipment costs ($1,500-2,500), some corrosion concerns
with certain materials, and the fact that you're still using chlorine (just
generating it differently). Many homeowners love saltwater systems, but
they're not universally superior—we discuss the trade-offs based on your
specific priorities.

**Q5: What happens if I need to move before my pool is paid off?**

Pool financing options vary in how they affect home sales. Home equity loans
and lines of credit typically remain with the property (new buyers assume them
or they're paid from sale proceeds). Personal loans remain your responsibility
regardless of home sale. Most sellers find that pools significantly increase
home value, especially in South Florida where they're expected amenities. The
increase often exceeds the remaining loan balance, meaning you profit even if
the loan isn't fully paid. We can discuss specific scenarios based on your
financing approach.