**Original Post:**,https://rpdfl.com/5-dream-pool-features-port-st-lucie/.     Building a pool in[ Port St.
Lucie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_St._Lucie,_Florida) represents a
significant investment in your lifestyle and property value. But what
separates a basic pool from a true backyard oasis? At **RPD Custom Pools** ,
we've designed hundreds of pools throughout South Florida, and we've
identified five features that consistently elevate pools from functional to
phenomenal.

These aren't just aesthetic upgrades—they're transformative elements that
change how you experience and enjoy your outdoor space every single day.

## **1\. Integrated Spa Features: Year-Round Luxury**

Imagine this: a cool January evening in Port St. Lucie (yes, we do have them
occasionally), and while the pool might be too chilly for comfortable
swimming, your attached spa is perfectly heated and inviting. This is why
integrated spa features have become one of our most requested additions.

An attached spa isn't just about winter enjoyment, though. After intense
workouts or long days, nothing beats hydrotherapy jets massaging tired
muscles. For families with older adults, the therapeutic benefits of warm
water immersion provide genuine health advantages. And let's be honest—there's
something undeniably luxurious about moving between cool pool water and warm
spa water during hot summer months.

### **Design Integration That Works**

The key is seamless integration. We design spas that share equipment with the
main pool (reducing costs and maintenance), feature spillover edges where spa
water cascades into the pool (creating visual and auditory appeal), include
comfortable seating with strategically placed jets, and incorporate
independent heating controls so you can enjoy the spa without heating the
entire pool.

At[ RPD Custom Pools](https://share.google/e6qggixHquf3pDCLT), we position
spas thoughtfully—usually elevated slightly to create that beautiful spillover
effect, but also considering sun exposure, views, and proximity to the house.
A poorly placed spa becomes an underused feature, while a well-positioned one
becomes the most popular spot in your backyard.

### **The Return on Investment**

Spas significantly increase your pool's usability throughout the year. Rather
than a pool you enjoy 6-8 months annually, you now have an outdoor retreat you
can use 12 months a year. For families, this dramatically improves the value
proposition of your entire pool investment.

## **2\. Dynamic Lighting Systems: After-Dark Magic**

If you're only swimming during daylight hours, you're missing half the magic.
Modern LED lighting systems have revolutionized what's possible with pool
aesthetics, turning ordinary pools into extraordinary nighttime destinations.

We're not talking about a single white bulb illuminating murky water.
Contemporary pool lighting includes color-changing LEDs with unlimited hues,
programmable sequences that shift colors automatically, synchronized systems
that coordinate pool, spa, and landscape lighting, app-based controls that let
you change settings from your phone, and energy-efficient operation that costs
pennies per month.

### **Creating Ambiance and Atmosphere**

Lighting transforms the entire feeling of your outdoor space. Soft blue
lighting creates tranquil, resort-like atmospheres perfect for relaxing
evening swims. Vibrant changing colors energize pool parties and celebrations.
Subtle white lighting provides elegant sophistication for formal gatherings.
The same pool can project entirely different moods depending on lighting
choices.

Beyond aesthetics, proper lighting dramatically improves safety. Well-lit
pools, steps, and deck areas prevent accidents and allow confident nighttime
use. We design lighting that balances these functional requirements with
creative possibilities.

### **Beyond the Pool Itself**

The best lighting designs extend beyond the pool into landscaping,
architectural features, and pathways. We coordinate uplighting for palms and
tropical plants, pathway lighting for safe navigation, accent lighting for
water features and structures, and deck lighting that defines spaces without
overwhelming the environment. This comprehensive approach creates a cohesive
outdoor environment rather than just a lit pool floating in darkness.

## **3\. Water Features: Sound and Movement**

Water in motion captivates us at a primal level. The sound of flowing water
masks neighborhood noise, creates tranquil atmospheres, and simply makes us
happy. This is why water features consistently rank among the most valued pool
additions.

The options range from subtle to spectacular. Deck jets create graceful arcs
of water that sparkle in sunlight and catch colored lighting at night
(children absolutely love running through them). Sheer descents produce smooth
sheets of water that shimmer like glass as they fall into the pool. Scuppers
offer modern, architectural water delivery with clean lines. Rock waterfalls
create natural, lagoon-style aesthetics with the relaxing sound of falling
water. Bubblers in shallow areas delight young children and add playful
elements.

### **Choosing the Right Features for Your Style**

Water feature selection should align with your overall pool design. Modern,
geometric pools call for clean-lined features like sheer descents or deck
jets. Natural, freeform pools welcome rock formations and organic-looking
waterfalls. We help clients at[ RPD Custom
Pools](https://share.google/e6qggixHquf3pDCLT) select features that enhance
their chosen aesthetic rather than conflicting with it.

Consider the sensory impact too. Some homeowners want dramatic visual
statements, while others prioritize the soothing sounds of water movement. We
can design features that emphasize either quality or balance both.

### **Practical Considerations**

Water features do more than look and sound beautiful—they improve water
circulation and aeration, helping maintain water quality. The movement
discourages mosquito breeding (important in Florida) and helps distribute
chemicals more evenly. These functional benefits supplement their aesthetic
value.

## **4\. Beach Entries and Tanning Ledges: Resort-Style Living**

Traditional pool entries involve steps or ladders—functional but uninspiring.
Beach entries (also called zero-entry or walk-in entries) transform the pool
experience with gradual slopes that mimic natural beaches, allowing you to
wade in slowly rather than plunging in.

Tanning ledges (also called sun shelves or baja shelches) are shallow
platforms, typically 8-12 inches deep, perfect for lounging in water while
staying cool. These features have exploded in popularity, and once you
experience them, you'll understand why.

### **Why Families Love Them**

Beach entries are spectacular for families with young children. Toddlers can
play safely in shallow water while parents supervise easily. The gradual entry
feels less intimidating than steps, encouraging kids to develop water
confidence naturally. No more struggling to carry children up and down pool
steps—they simply walk in and out independently.

Tanning ledges offer the best of both worlds—you're in the pool staying cool
but in shallow enough water to relax comfortably on loungers or simply stretch
out. It's where adults gravitate during pool parties, drinks in hand, staying
refreshed without committing to full swimming.

### **Design Flexibility**

These features work in pools of various sizes and styles. We've incorporated
beach entries into compact pools where space is limited (using one corner
rather than an entire side) and expansive resort-style pools where the entry
spans the entire pool width. The key is proportioning the feature
appropriately for your overall pool dimensions.

Tanning ledges can include built-in seating, umbrella sleeves for shade,
bubblers or jets for added luxury, and integrated lighting for nighttime use.
We customize these features to match your specific desires and how you
envision using the space.

## **5\. Automation and Smart Controls: Effortless Pool Management**

Technology has revolutionized pool ownership, transforming it from a
maintenance chore into truly effortless enjoyment. Smart automation systems
control every aspect of your pool from your smartphone, whether you're
lounging on your deck or across the country on vacation.

Modern automation manages filtration schedules (optimizing runtime for
efficiency while maintaining perfect water quality), heating systems (ensuring
your spa is ready exactly when you want it), lighting controls (programming
sequences or changing colors on demand), water feature activation (turning
features on or off remotely), and even chemical feeders (maintaining balanced
water with minimal manual intervention).

### **The Convenience Factor**

Picture this scenario: you're at work and friends text asking to come over for
an evening swim. A few taps on your phone turn on the heater, adjust the
lighting to party mode, and activate your waterfall. By the time everyone
arrives, your pool is perfectly prepared. That's the power of automation.

Or consider this: you're on vacation and receive a storm warning for Port St.
Lucie. From anywhere in the world, you can check your pool equipment status,
adjust settings if needed, and receive alerts if any problems occur. This
peace of mind alone justifies the investment for many homeowners.

### **Energy Efficiency and Cost Savings**

Smart systems optimize equipment operation based on actual needs rather than
fixed schedules. Variable-speed pumps adjust flow rates depending on whether
you're running filtration, heating, or operating features. The system runs
heaters only when necessary to maintain your target temperature. Over time,
these efficiencies significantly reduce operating costs, often paying for the
automation system within a few years.

### **Future-Proofing Your Investment**

Pool automation technology continues advancing rapidly. Systems we install
today accept software updates and can integrate with emerging technologies.
This means your pool grows smarter over time rather than becoming obsolete. We
design systems with expansion capabilities so you can add features later
without replacing the entire control infrastructure.

## **Bringing It All Together**

The most successful pool designs don't just add features randomly—they
integrate them thoughtfully into a cohesive vision that reflects your
lifestyle and preferences. At RPD Custom Pools, we guide clients through
feature selection, helping identify which additions provide the most value for
their specific situation.

Not every pool needs every feature. Some families prioritize play features for
children, while empty-nesters focus on spa therapy and ambiance. We listen
carefully to understand how you'll actually use your pool, then recommend
features that enhance that experience.

## **Investment Considerations**

These transformative features do add to your pool's cost, but they also
dramatically increase your enjoyment and your property value. We help clients
balance their dream vision with budget realities, sometimes phasing features
over time rather than including everything in initial construction.

The good news? Many of these features can be added to existing pools through
renovation projects. If you already have a pool but wish it offered more, we
can assess what's feasible to add and help you prioritize upgrades that
deliver maximum impact.

## **Port St. Lucie: Perfect for Pool Living**

Port St. Lucie's year-round warm weather and outdoor-focused lifestyle make it
ideal for pool ownership. Our climate means you'll actually use these features
extensively rather than considering them expensive luxuries that sit unused.
When you calculate enjoyment per dollar invested, features that extend pool
usability and increase daily pleasure provide exceptional value.

We've designed and built pools throughout Port St. Lucie and surrounding areas
for years, understanding local considerations like soil conditions, typical
lot configurations, and design preferences common in various neighborhoods.
This local expertise ensures your pool integrates perfectly with your property
and lifestyle.  
  

## **Frequently Asked Questions**

**Q1: Can these features be added to existing pools?**

Many of these features can be incorporated into existing pools through
renovation, though some are easier than others. Lighting upgrades and
automation systems are straightforward additions to virtually any pool. Water
features like deck jets can often be added during deck renovations. Tanning
ledges and beach entries typically require more extensive reconstruction but
are still possible. Spas can be added adjacent to existing pools. We provide
free consultations to assess your current pool and discuss which upgrades are
feasible.

**Q2: How much do these features typically add to pool construction costs?**

Costs vary significantly based on scope and quality. Integrated spas typically
add $15,000-$30,000, LED lighting systems range from $2,000-$8,000 depending
on complexity, water features run $3,000-$15,000+ based on type and scale,
beach entries and tanning ledges add $8,000-$20,000, and automation systems
cost $2,500-$6,000 for comprehensive control. These are general ranges—we
provide detailed estimates for your specific project.

**Q3: Which features provide the best return on investment?**

From a resale perspective, lighting and water features typically offer the
strongest returns because they create immediate "wow factor" that appeals to
buyers. Spas also add significant value in our market. However, the best
"return" is often measured in personal enjoyment rather than resale value.
Features you and your family use extensively provide tremendous value
regardless of their impact on eventual home sale price.

**Q4: How much do these features increase ongoing maintenance costs?**

Most modern features are surprisingly efficient. LED lighting uses minimal
electricity. Properly designed water features don't significantly increase
water consumption or chemical needs. Automation actually reduces maintenance
costs by optimizing equipment operation. Spas do require additional heating
costs (typically $30-80 monthly depending on use) and slightly more frequent
water chemistry attention. Overall, the maintenance increase is modest
compared to the enjoyment benefits.

**Q5: Are smart pool controls reliable, and what happens if the system
fails?**

Modern automation systems are highly reliable with redundant safety features.
If the control system experiences problems, pools default to manual
operation—you can still run equipment using traditional controls. We install
systems from established manufacturers with strong track records and
comprehensive warranties. Regular maintenance ensures optimal performance, and
we provide ongoing support if any issues arise. Most system "failures" are
simply connectivity issues easily resolved remotely.